---
filename: _posts/blog/2012-11-30-does-the-universe-have-a-purpose?.md
layout: post
title: "Does the Universe have a purpose?"
category: blog
published: true 
tags:
- science
- universe
---

{% youtube 7pL5vzIMAhs %}

Neil deGrasse Tyson is, to my taste, one of the greatest 
outreach scientist of our time. Not long ago, the Templeton Fundation
asked leading scientist and scholars ["Does the Universe have a purpose?"](http://www.templeton.org/purpose/). 
  His answer is the one I like the most. 
<!--more-->

>Anyone who expresses a more definitive response to the question is
claiming access to knowledge not based on empirical foundations. This
remarkably persistent way of thinking, common to most religions and some
branches of philosophy, has failed badly in past efforts to understand,
and thereby predict the operations of the universe and our place within
it.

>To assert that the universe has a purpose implies the universe has
intent. And intent implies a desired outcome. But who would do the
desiring? And what would a desired outcome be? That carbon-based life is
inevitable? Or that sentient primates are life's neurological pinnacle?
Are answers to these questions even possible without expressing a
profound bias of human sentiment? Of course humans were not around to
ask these questions for 99.9999% of cosmic history. So if the purpose of
the universe was to create humans then the cosmos was embarrassingly
inefficient about it.

>And if a further purpose of the universe was to create a fertile cradle
for life, then our cosmic environment has got an odd way of showing it.
Life on Earth, during more than 3.5 billion years of existence, has been
persistently assaulted by natural sources of mayhem, death, and
destruction. Ecological devastation exacted by volcanoes, climate
change, earthquakes, tsunamis, storms, pestilence, and especially killer
asteroids have left extinct 99.9% of all species that have ever lived
here.

>How about human life itself? If you are religious, you might declare
that the purpose of life is to serve God. But if you're one of the 100
billion bacteria living and working in a single centimeter of our lower
intestine (rivaling, by the way, the total number of humans who have
ever been born) you would give an entirely different answer. You might
instead say that the purpose of human life is to provide you with a
dark, but idyllic, anaerobic habitat of fecal matter.

>So in the absence of human hubris, and after we filter out the
delusional assessments it promotes within us, the universe looks more
and more random. Whenever events that are purported to occur in our best
interest are as numerous as other events that would just as soon kill
us, then intent is hard, if not impossible, to assert. So while I cannot
claim to know for sure whether or not the universe has a purpose, the
case against it is strong, and visible to anyone who sees the universe
as it is rather than as they wish it to be.
