---
layout: post
category: project
title: "[IDEA] Apple patent to proctect your phone screen"
published: true 
tags:
- patent
- idea
---

How to avoid breaking your glass screen when you drop your phone?
Phones fall down, and sometimes nothing happens and sometime the screen
shatters. Can it be avoided? Making the glass is harder and increases
the weight. I got an idea to fix that.

Today I was attending a talk by Mark P Mills on Patent Law at the Notre
Dame Law School. He mention that Apple had just patented a way to do
that, but he didn´t go until the details, just that he thought it was
thought.

Apple indeed has a patent to protect the hard disk when your laptop
falls. They do show by detecting free fall via accelerometers. When the
laptop detects it´s falling it will park the heads of the hard disk,
thus avoiding the hit on the ground that otherwise could make the heads
scratch the surface of the disk.

But how do they protect the screen? The idea would then be to detect a
free fall, then quickly orient the phone in the air so that it touches
ground on the back, or on the side, or whatever position is deemed most
likely to help survive the phone with minimal damage. 

I didn´t look at the patent, but I thought about it and this my idea:
Drop the battery.

Rotating the phone mid air requires a burst of energy. You could get
there using puffs of air, but that would take space for the hardware.
You could also use gyroscopes (like satellites use) but they are not
that quick. You need to move a significant portion of the phone mass to
rotate the thing quickly. Like the battery.

The idea is then to insert 4 rotating-axis screws on the corner of the
battery. The phone would calculate the momentum of inertiea (how the
phone is rotating) and carefully release 2 of the screws to compensate
that rotation. As the battery unwinds the rotation is compensated. If
the rotation needed is less than the full wind of the release, the other
2 screws will also be released, letting the battery separate (reducing
thus the weight on impact). 

To increase the inertia, the screws could have small springs. Here is a
quick sketch:

{% image phone-battery.png%}

No idea is that is what Apple thought of, but may be there is a chance
Apple would finally make replaceable batteries in the end.

